To the Student
What is discrete mathematics? Discrete mathematics is the part of mathematics devoted to
the study of discrete objects. (Here discrete means consisting of distinct or unconnected
elements.) The kinds of problems solved using discrete mathematics include:
 How many ways are there to choose a valid password on a computer system?
 What is the probability of winning a lottery?
 Is there a link between two computers in a network?
 How can I identify spam e-mail messages?
 How can I encrypt a message so that no unintended recipient can read it?
 What is the shortest path between two cities using a transportation system?
 How can a list of integers be sorted so that the integers are in increasing order?
 How many steps are required to do such a sorting?
 How can it be proved that a sorting algorithm correctly sorts a list?
 How can a circuit that adds two integers be designed?
 How many valid Internet addresses are there?
You will learn the discrete structures and techniques needed to solve problems such as these.
More generally, discrete mathematics is used whenever objects are counted, when relationships between finite (or countable) sets are studied, and when processes involving a finite number
of steps are analyzed. A key reason for the growth in the importance of discrete mathematics is
that information is stored and manipulated by computing machines in a discrete fashion.
WHY STUDY DISCRETE MATHEMATICS? There are several important reasons for
studying discrete mathematics. First, through this course you can develop your mathematical
maturity: that is, your ability to understand and create mathematical arguments.You will not get
very far in your studies in the mathematical sciences without these skills.
Second, discrete mathematics is the gateway to more advanced courses in all parts of
the mathematical sciences. Discrete mathematics provides the mathematical foundations for
many computer science courses including data structures, algorithms, database theory, automata
theory, formal languages, compiler theory, computer security, and operating systems. Students
find these courses much more difficult when they have not had the appropriate mathematical
foundations from discrete math. One student has sent me an e-mail message saying that she
used the contents of this book in every computer science course she took!
Math courses based on the material studied in discrete mathematics include logic, set theory,
number theory, linear algebra, abstract algebra, combinatorics, graph theory, and probability
theory (the discrete part of the subject).
Also, discrete mathematics contains the necessary mathematical background for solving
problems in operations research (including many discrete optimization techniques), chemistry,
engineering, biology, and so on. In the text, we will study applications to some of these areas.
Many students find their introductory discrete mathematics course to be significantly more
challenging than courses they have previously taken. One reason for this is that one of the
primary goals of this course is to teach mathematical reasoning and problem solving, rather
than a discrete set of skills. The exercises in this book are designed to reflect this goal. Although
there are plenty of exercises in this text similar to those addressed in the examples, a large
xviii
To the Student xix
percentage of the exercises require original thought. This is intentional. The material discussed
in the text provides the tools needed to solve these exercises, but your job is to successfully
apply these tools using your own creativity. One of the primary goals of this course is to learn
how to attack problems that may be somewhat different from any you may have previously
seen. Unfortunately, learning how to solve only particular types of exercises is not sufficient for
success in developing the problem-solving skills needed in subsequent courses and professional
work. This text addresses many different topics, but discrete mathematics is an extremely diverse
and large area of study. One of my goals as an author is to help you develop the skills needed
to master the additional material you will need in your own future pursuits.